---
layout: post
title: "UX is strange: separators and the illusion of less"
---

I'm not a UX expert in any way, so you may find this doesn't apply to
you or to others, but I do hope this'll be useful or at least a bit
interesting. Over this year, one of my projects has been a touch based
app, with its core functionality accessed through a toolbar of menu
buttons.

Given it's a touch app, there's no way you could pack in lots of buttons
like you might on a traditional desktop app without making for frustrating
finger poking exercises. Here's a screenshot:

![](/blog/images/icoworks1.3dev.png)

You can see that in-between the two sides of the toolbar, I've put the
current file's name. That in fact wasn't added until a few point releases
in. Seems a little insane in hindsight, but working out how to fit things
into a touch app is definitely not easy unless you're happy with bringing
in desktop paradigms.

Now you might've also noticed that there's hardly any space for the
filename to be shown.

Typically separators are used so we can group logically related things
together, but with so few buttons visible at all times, I figured it
wouldn't harm to try removing the separators (instead of say, packing
buttons even tighter, or shoving some into the "more" menu). So I got this:

![](/blog/images/icoworks1.5.png)

Strangely enough, the toolbar then didn't feel like it was giving as much
of an illusion of 'less' as it used to, even though at the same time it
was looking a lot more comfortably spaced.

This does sound quite waffly, and I'll expect it won't help change the
viewpoint of people who despise the idea of UX. And I'm *certainly* not
asking everyone to suddenly go all out on a separator and spacing
destruction rampage.

But honestly, I found it quite interesting to find that the biggest UX
impacts can come from such small interface tweaks. Someone with the proper
chops in this field probably has some interesting way to describe this.
